# Covcom submission notes


This is where I will be making my notes, thinking and support evidence
for my submission to the 2nd NZ covid comission
https://haveyoursay.covid19lessons.royalcommission.nz

The country has already had one enquiry, avialable at
https://www.covid19lessons.royalcommission.nz/reports-lessons-learned/
but the present government is not going to act on any of the
recomendations until next year, when it has the report organised by the
polticla party on record as saying “When it came to COVID, we completely
blew out what the value of a life was” as well. This is the second covid
enquiry.

I know, from comments in hate mail directed at me, the fringe anti-vax
supporters of minor, but at present disproportionately influential,
political parties consider this to be “their” equiry that will validate
their claims and beliefs.

Even, if it does so, I am still determined that my contribution (and all
contributions that do not request privacy will be public) will make it
clear that there are those within the country prepared to advocate for
an approach that is both fact based and caring for others. History can
be the judge about the the commission final report.

So, with submissions due late April I will be doing most of the work on,
and updates to this site, in mid-late March, as I have other short term
priorities. For the moment there are some initial thoughts,which I am
sharing by quoting the terms of reference and suggestions from the
commission and framing my initial response.

As I gather supporting evidence and sharpen my thinking, there will be a
page for each topic with more detail.

Plain text is from the commission English language make a submission
page
https://haveyoursay.covid19lessons.royalcommission.nz/royal-commission-covid-19-lessons/make-a-submission/
my initial responses/comments are in italics.

## Overview

The Royal Commission of Inquiry into COVID-19 Lessons Learned was
established in December 2022.

The first phase of the COVID-19 Inquiry ran until 28 November 2024,
including a public submissions period in early 2024. Phase Two of the
Inquiry is now underway. Phase Two is looking at some additional topics
that were not covered in Phase One, as well as looking in more detail at
some of the topics included in Phase One, such as mandates and
lockdowns.

Phase Two’s primary focus is reviewing key decisions made by the New
Zealand Government in response to COVID-19 during 2021 and 2022.
Specifically, we are looking at key decisions the Government made in the
following areas:

*I think some factual scene setting is useful for where things were at
both for NZ in 2021 and 2022 and the world (so New Zealand’s response to
the world rather than treating New Zealand as a vacuum). Because even
though the terms of reference where 2021/22 there had been effects in
2020, and like other high vaccination societies detectable mortality
effects would continue through into 2023 (for lower vaccination
societies where data is available 2024)*

Vaccines, including mandates, approvals,

*As it involves “how it affected your and whānau/friends lives” I am
think of frame it as “My mother is still alive, unlike elderly relatives
of friends in other countries, nor was I hospitalised needing critical
care for covid unlike people I went to school with now living elsewhere”
Then going for the point that peoples false beliefs about vaccination
affected me as a small section of the population who rejects the last
130 years of biology attempted to require others to live by their
beliefs. Buffer this with I knew myself to hold a true, rational view
because of {cite evidence}“.*

*For mandates, I acknowledge my perspective of why they are a legitimate
tool is pretty idiosyncratic so people may not want to draw from this. I
am of the opinion that at a time of an infectious disease pandemic, the
state has a special responsibility to minimise the risk to lives of
people at times those people are required (by health necessity or legal
requirement) to physically interact with agents of the state. And I
feel, as a non-lawyer, that the vibe of the Bill of Rights Act stuff
about not being deprived of life is consistent with that. As the covid
vaccine was both safe (for which I will spell out the evidence) and
effective (spelling out the 2021 evidence on reducing transmission, and
the 2022 Omicron era evidence because they were different levels of
reducing transmission) at reducing onward transmission (also making the
point here that many critics are falsely conflating does not perfectly
counter every infection with has no effect at all), agents of the state
rejecting being part of mandates are wanting to exercise their state
mandated power in a way more risky to others.*

*Approvals is, IMO, a shout out to conspiracy claims around the approval
processes. But I think it worth discussing the multiple compatibile
juristictions change that has alread been made has the existing
potential to speed up the process at future times of crisis.*

and safety Lockdowns, particularly the lockdowns of late 2021 and the
extended Auckland/Northland lockdown

*As with earlier sections, I am going to be contrasting what happened to
me, my whānau and friends in New Zealand compared to countries that were
more open and had higher economic and mental health effects. And I am
going to note that I have suffered from people spouting misinformation
around lockdowns, in a similar way to that of vaccines. Just because a
report into future pandemic responses need to note that there are some
very vocal people with very vocal views unsupported by evidence, does
not mean that future responses should be based on those very vocal views
unsupported by evidence.*

Testing and tracing technologies, like RAT tests

*My personal experience was I was comfortable visiting my elderly mother
in person more often than had I not known if I was potentially
infectious or not, and accompany that general point about friend in
other places living in situations of insufficient vaccine cover and no
easy way to know infectious status. I do have some thoughts about
clarity of messaging at different times as the tools changed, & that the
state needs to be clear on the reasons and effects of changes*

and the COVID-19 Tracer app,

*I don’t know what the Tracer app is getting a mention for, unless it is
“big brother” misinformation. Because in this country it was a privacy
preserving opt-in system that saved lives. While other places had less
effective implementations.*

and public health materials, like masks.

*I think masks needs to be accompanied by discussion are short-term
threat environments, stage of pandemic acute risks, and (again) the Bill
of Rights related moral stance but with the location of the interaction
as a risk environment. This is where we get into the nitty-gritty of
subpopulation with heighted health risks being required to attend
particular locations. This could branch into a broader discussion about
the rights of people to be safely part of society, but I haven’t thought
out the keeping tightly within the terms, vs. what personal statements
other with health conditions might wish to make to the commission about
their risks which would absolutely fit the terms.*

We will be using our review of these key decisions to give advice to the
Government on how Aotearoa New Zealand could prepare for and respond to
any future pandemics. Phase Two will only make recommendations to the
Government regarding the topics included above.

How you can take part

We want to hear from you about how key decisions in the areas listed
above (like the use of longer lockdowns, or making RAT tests free, for
example) affected or changed your life, or the lives of your whānau or
friends.

You could tell us how these decisions by the Government had an effect on
your work or business, your relationships, important life events, your
health, or your education, for example.

You can do this by filling in the online submission form, which you will
find by clicking the ‘Make a submission’ link at the bottom of this
page.

In the form, you will have the option of either writing your submission
in the text box provided, or attaching a Word document or PDF that
contains your written submission. You can only upload one document.

After you make your submission, you will be asked some questions about
yourself. Providing this information is optional, but we really
encourage you to fill it in. This information helps our Inquiry better
understand your perspective and makes sure we hear from a range of
people. It also means we can contact you about your submission if we
need to.

More detailed pages with data, background and detail (to come later):

- reference period

- vaccines

- lockdowns

- RAT tests

- Covid App

- Masks
